# Effect of weight and center of gravity of firefighting helmet systems on cervical spine loading

Recent injury reports suggest that the heavy-protective firefighter helmet, though designed to protect firefighter’s head from thermal and low-velocity direct impact, actually contributes to overexertion/sprain-related head and neck injuries. The modern firefighting helmet also serves as a platform for supporting additional functional accessories, such as communication devices, face shields, visors, thermal imaging, and lighting equipment. The addition of these functional accessories has two major effects—an increase in the total weight, and a potential shift in the center of gravity (CoG) of the helmet system (i.e., helmet plus supporting accessories).  These changes can lead to injuries to the cervical spine, in addition to reduced physical mobility and endurance capability of firefighters.

Therefore, we performed a preliminary study, approved by the local institutional review board (IRB), to evaluate the effect of weight and center of gravity of firefighting helmet systems on the risk of head-neck injuries.  We evaluated three different firefighter helmets: traditional-look (with-brim) helmet (58 oz), jet-style helmet (62.25 oz), and jet-style helmet with lighting and communication systems (70.85 oz).  We recruited one firefighter (male; aged 43 years old) from the local fire department to perform some simple sustained and dynamic head-neck movement. We mainly measured the head kinematics, head-helmet kinematics, and ground reaction forces while the participant performed a full-range of head-neck range of motions: flexion-extension and lateral bending, sustained-till-exhaustion at full head-neck flexed and extended postures. We used subject-specific musculoskeletal models in the OpenSim musculoskeletal modeling platform to estimate the intervertebral joint reaction forces of the cervical spine from the kinematics and ground reaction forces data for dynamic head-neck movement in four different conditions: (a) without a helmet, (b) with traditional-look helmet, (c) with jet-style helmet, and (d) with a jet-style helmet with lighting and communication systems. We then compared the results between the different conditions.  
